I thought for a few minutes this morning
we could consider two verses that highlight
the importance
of being merciful in our actions
and also highlight the blessings
that result when we are merciful.
The first verse is at Matthew 5:7.
So I invite you to turn there,
Matthew 5:7.
And here in the Sermon on the Mount
in the happinesses
that introduce this sermon,
Jesus said: “Happy are the merciful,
[why?] since they will be shown mercy.”
How is it
that “the merciful” are “shown mercy”?
Well, a striking example
can be found in Acts chapter 9,
where we’re introduced
to a first-century disciple
named Tabitha, or Dorcas.
She lived in the port city of Joppa.
And what reputation did Tabitha have?
Well, she’s described in the Bible
as one who “abounded in good deeds
and gifts of mercy.”
Now, how did Tabitha give “gifts of mercy”?
She was a seamstress,
and she used her skill to address a need.
She made garments for needy widows,
and they appreciated
her gifts of mercy very much.
So when Tabitha fell ill and died,
the widows were grief-stricken.
The disciples in Joppa,
when they learned that the apostle Peter
was just 11 miles (18 km) away in Lydda,
sent and asked him
to come without delay to Joppa.
Peter accepted the invitation.
And what did he find
in Joppa when he got there?
Grieving widows who bore eloquent testimony
to the gifts of mercy
that Tabitha had given them.
Peter was so moved
that with the help of Jehovah’s holy spirit,
he did something
that up until that time hadn’t happened
according to the Bible record.
As an apostle,
he raised someone from the dead.
He resurrected Tabitha,
and that was a great mercy to her.
The point?
Tabitha gave gifts of mercy
that elicited a merciful act in her behalf.
“Happy are the merciful,
since they will be shown mercy.”
Tabitha did what she could.
She used her skill to fill a need.
A gift of mercy may appear to be
large or small in the eyes of observers.
But when it’s prompted
by love and fills a genuine need,
it is appreciated.
And more important, Jehovah notices,
just as he noticed Tabitha’s gifts of mercy.
The second verse that we want to consider
is in James chapter 2.
Turn there with me,
please, to James chapter 2,
and we’re going to read verse 13:
“For the one who does not practice mercy
“will have his judgment without mercy.
Mercy triumphs over judgment.”
Now, that’s a thought-provoking statement.
How is it that mercy triumphs over judgment?
In the Bible, Jehovah frankly tells us
that “each of us will render an account
for himself [or herself] to God.”
And when that time comes
and Jehovah evaluates us as individuals,
he takes into consideration
the acts of mercy
that we have performed for others.
Now, the thought
is not that we buy ourselves out of trouble.
The point is that Jehovah sees the kind acts
that we’re prompted to do
by our compassionate heart,
and he takes that into consideration.
Now, James frankly addresses
the other side of the coin, doesn’t he?
“The one who does not practice mercy
will have his judgment without mercy.”
A significant way
that you and I can demonstrate mercy
is by freely forgiving
those who sin against us.
Is that always easy?
No, especially if we’ve been hurt or damaged.
It may be very challenging
to make the decision to forgive.
But how important is it
that we demonstrate this kind of mercy?
Well, the answer to that question is found
in another illustration that Jesus gave,
recorded in Matthew chapter 18.
There Jesus talked about a slave
who was indebted
to his master for 60 million denarii.
It was an impossible debt.
If the slave had lived a thousand lifetimes,
he couldn’t have repaid it.
The master ordered the slave and his family
and all that he had to be sold.
The slave begged for mercy.
The master was moved with pity
and canceled the entire debt.
What a beautiful gift, or act of mercy!
Well, what happened next?
The forgiven slave turned around
and confronted a fellow slave
who owed him 100 denarii
—just a tiny fraction
of what he had been forgiven.
But when his fellow slave
couldn’t repay the debt,
the forgiven slave
had him thrown into prison.
What an injustice!
And when the master learned of it,
he was “provoked to wrath.”
He asked: “Should you not also
have shown mercy
to your fellow slave
as I showed mercy to you?”
What is the point of application?
Jesus said: “My heavenly Father
“will also deal with you in the same way
if each of you does not forgive
your brother from your heart.”
So the matter of forgiveness
is just that important.
It’s been said
that forgiveness is like money.
It can be spent freely
and mercifully on others,
or it can be hoarded stingily.
We can’t afford
to be stingy with forgiveness.
Instead, it’s better to experience the joy
that comes from giving by letting go
and canceling the debt.
Consider the experience
of a Christian elder named Miguel.
Miguel’s grandson was murdered.
The murderer was captured,
tried, and imprisoned.
Sometime later, Miguel was invited
to share in the prison ministry.
Can you guess which prison?
That’s right.
He was asked to go to the very prison
where his grandson’s murderer
was incarcerated.
At first, Miguel was hesitant.
He didn’t know whether he should.
But then he decided to accept the invitation.
And sure enough, while in the prison,
he was confronted
by the man who murdered his grandson.
How would Miguel handle that situation?
With mildness and in a way
that promoted peace,
he invited the man
to join him for the Bible study.
To Miguel’s surprise,
the man accepted the invitation.
And after the study,
he confessed to Miguel
something that he never
admitted during his trial.
He confessed to killing Miguel’s grandson.
And then he asked for forgiveness.
What would Miguel do?
Well, as it turned out,
he studied with the man,
and the man progressed
to the point of baptism
and became one of our brothers.
What a beautiful
gift of mercy and forgiveness
and a fine example for all of us!
So, what have we learned?
If we’re merciful, we can be happy
because we’ll be shown mercy,
and “mercy triumphs over judgment.”
If we remember those things,
then we will gladly do as Jesus said:
“Go and [act mercifully] yourself.”